§11A-3-1: Declaration of legislative purpose and policy
This section outlines the reasons why the state has tax lien sales. It states that tax income is necessary for state, county, and city governments, especially for schools. When people don't pay their taxes, it's a burden on the government and unfair to others who do pay. The law aims to quickly enforce tax claims, transfer delinquent properties to responsible owners, notify delinquent property owners about the pending issuance of a tax deed, and allow sales of these lands without needing to go to court. The goal is to do this in a way that's efficient, respects people's rights, and helps manage escheated (property for which there is no legal owner), waste, and unappropriated lands.

§11A-3-2: Second publication of list of delinquent real estate; notice
This section outlines the process for notifying owners that their property is delinquent. By September 10 each year, the sheriff needs to prepare a list of all delinquent properties. This list will be published with a notice of sale and includes a table with the property details and the amount of taxes, interest, and charges due. If the properties aren't sold at auction, they can be sold by the Auditor. The property can be redeemed (paid off) by the owner before it's certified to the Auditor. If the property isn't redeemed, it'll be sold. Notices will be sent to the property owner, lienholders, and any other interested parties. Charges will be added to cover the costs of these procedures.

§11A-3-3: Waiver of notice by person claiming lien
Anyone claiming a lien (legal claim or right against a property) must file a statement with the sheriff or they'll be considered to have waived their right to notice. This must be done when the lien is created, released, or if the lienholder's address changes. The sheriff should publish a notice once a year reminding people about this requirement.

§11A-3-4: Redemption after second publication and before certification to the Auditor
This section explains that property owners can redeem (pay off) their property at any time before it's certified to the Auditor.

§11A-3-8: Certification of property to the Auditor
If a property isn't redeemed by October 31, the sheriff has to certify it to the Auditor. The Auditor will then manage its disposition (what happens to it).

§11A-3-9: Sheriff’s list of redemptions and certifications; oath
The sheriff has to make a list of all the properties that were redeemed or certified to the Auditor, and swear an oath that the list is accurate.

§11A-3-10: Sheriff to account for proceeds; disposition of surplus
The sheriff must account for the money received from all redemptions. Any property on the delinquent list that hasn't been redeemed or certified is considered to have been redeemed, and the sheriff has to account for the taxes, interest, and charges as if they were paid.

§11A-3-11: Return of list certifications; redemptions
The sheriff has to deliver the list of redemptions and certifications to the county clerk within a month after finishing the certification. If they don't, they can be fined. The clerk then sends a copy of the list to the Auditor.

§11A-3-12. Amendment of such list.
This section is about correcting mistakes on the list of redemptions and certifications (documents proving that a tax obligation has been fulfilled). If the sheriff makes an error on this list, they or anyone else who has an interest in the matter can apply to the county commission within 30 days of the list being published to have the list amended. Any person who could be negatively affected by the changes has to be notified at least 10 days before the application. If it's proven that there was an error, the commission can order the sheriff to file an amended list. The amended list replaces the original list in the clerk's office, and the clerk also sends a copy to the Auditor. Any corrections are noted on the records of delinquent lands (properties for which taxes have not been paid).

§11A-3-13. Publication by sheriff of certification list.
This section describes the process the sheriff needs to follow to publish a list of all the certifications they've made. The list has to be published within a month of the certification's completion and should include all the tax liens on real estate in the county for that year. The list is to be published as a legal advertisement in the county. The cost of preparing and publishing this list is $15 per item, which is added to the existing taxes, interest, and charges due on each property.

§11A-3-32. Sheriff to keep proceeds in separate accounts; disposition.
This part of the law instructs the sheriff to keep the money from all tax redemptions (when someone pays their overdue taxes) in a separate fund. The money is used to cover various costs, such as publishing the sheriff's list of delinquent properties and other costs related to this process. After these costs are paid, any leftover money is divided proportionally among the different taxing units based on the total amount of taxes they are owed from the properties that were redeemed. This money is then distributed semiannually to the Auditor and the local taxing units. The Auditor determines the format for the records the sheriff must keep for this process, as well as the method for distributing the funds.

§11A-3-33. State commissioner of delinquent and nonentered lands.
The State Auditor also serves as the state commissioner of lands that are delinquent (having unpaid taxes) and nonentered (not listed in the tax records). The Auditor has the responsibility to manage these lands and carry out laws related to them.

§11A-3-34. Deputy commissioners of delinquent and nonentered lands; bond.
The State Auditor appoints a Deputy Commissioner for each county in the state to manage these delinquent and nonentered lands. Deputy Commissioners are subject to the Auditor's control and must be lawyers. They serve as local agents for the Auditor in their respective counties. They are required to provide a bond (a form of insurance) to guarantee they carry out their duties faithfully.

§11A-3-35. Land record in Auditor's office.
The Auditor must keep a detailed and permanent record of all delinquent, nonentered, escheated (forfeited to the state) and waste and unappropriated lands. This record is considered reliable evidence of the information it contains.

§11A-3-36. Operating fund for land department in Auditor’s office.
The Auditor has a special fund for operating the land department. Money for this fund comes from various sources such as redemption fees, publication charges, surplus proceeds from land sales etc. This fund is used to pay for the operation and maintenance of the land department.

§11A-3-36a. Credit card approved form of payment in land department of Auditor's office.
The Auditor's office accepts credit cards as a form of payment for all fees and charges related to the land department operations.

§11A-3-37. Disposition of nonentered lands.
If land isn't listed for taxation (nonentered) for five consecutive years, the State Auditor takes control of it and it may be sold or transferred under the provisions of this article.

§11A-3-38. Redemption of nonentered or certified lands.
The owner of a property that's been certified to the Auditor due to unpaid taxes or hasn't been entered for taxation can redeem (reclaim) the property by paying all outstanding amounts to the Auditor. This can be done before the land is certified to the Deputy Commissioner. The amounts due include taxes, interest, and charges that have accrued since the property was certified to the Auditor or discovered as nonentered.

§11A-3-39. Certificate of redemption issued by Auditor; recordation.

When someone pays what's needed to redeem (get back) their real estate, the Auditor will issue a certificate of redemption. This certificate proves that the person paid, and the state no longer has a claim on the property. The certificate is made in three copies: one for the Auditor's records, one for the person who redeemed the property, and one for the county clerk where the property is located. The county clerk updates their records and keeps a copy of the certificate.
There's a $20 fee for issuing the certificate, plus 7.5% of the total taxes and interest, up to a maximum of $120.
§11A-3-40. Compulsory redemption at election of Auditor.

The Auditor can force the owner of a property to pay the necessary amount to redeem it. If the owner doesn't pay, the Auditor can use the same methods for collecting this payment as a sheriff would for collecting taxes.
§11A-3-41. Auditor to report redemptions to county officers; disposition of redemption money; credit of state taxes to proper fund.

The Auditor must keep the county officials updated about which properties have been redeemed. This includes notifying the sheriff, assessor, and the county clerk. The money collected from the redemption is then distributed appropriately among the relevant county units.
§11A-3-42. Lands subject to sale by Auditor.

If a property is not redeemed, the Auditor can sell it. This includes lands that were certified to the Auditor and not redeemed, non-entered lands, escheated lands (that revert to the state when the owner dies without heirs), and waste and unappropriated lands.
§11A-3-43. Officers to report lands subject to sale.

If any county official discovers non-entered land, they must report it to the Auditor. The county surveyor might have to make a survey of the land, for which they'll get paid.
§11A-3-44. Auditor to certify list of lands to be sold; lands so certified are subject to sale.

The Auditor has to prepare a list of all lands that can be sold. This list is shared with several parties, including the county clerk and the sheriff. A fee of $25 is added to the existing taxes and charges for each tract of land on this list.
§11A-3-45. Auditor to hold annual auction.

The Auditor will auction off the lands on the list at the county courthouse. Payments must be made in cash, check, or money order. The auction continues until all lands have been offered for sale.
If a nonprofit organization, certified as such and primarily focused on construction of housing or public facilities, submits a bid within 5% of the highest bid, they will be sold the property instead of the highest bidder.

§11A-3-46. Publication of notice of auction.
This states that the Auditor should advertise a public auction for land tracts or lots once a week for three weeks before the auction. This ad should follow a specific format, detailing the location, time, date of the auction, and the description of the land to be sold. The payment for any land purchased should be made by check or money order payable to the Auditor on the day of the sale. If any land remains unsold after the auction, it can be sold later without additional advertising. All sales are subject to the approval of the Auditor.

§11A-3-47. Redemption prior to sale.
This section outlines that any person entitled to pay the taxes on the lands certified for auction can redeem the land before the auction by paying the taxes, interest, and charges due. The deputy commissioner prepares a receipt, keeps one copy, and sends copies to various officers who note the redemption on their records.

§11A-3-48. Unsold lands subject to sale without auction or additional advertising.
If lands remain unsold after the auction, or if they were sold at a tax sale within the previous five years but weren't redeemed and no deed was secured, the Auditor can sell them without further public auction or additional advertising. The lands can be sold in a certain priority order to adjacent landowners, the municipality, the county commission, or the West Virginia Land Stewardship Corporation, or to any party willing to purchase.

§11A-3-49. Purchase by owner or deputy commissioner or other officers prohibited; coowner free to purchase at sale.
This section makes it illegal for certain people (like the owner of the land, certain officers, or their agents) to purchase the land at sale. It also states that co-owners, barring certain exceptions, can purchase the interest of other co-owners in the land at the sale.

§ 11A-3-50. Receipt to purchaser for purchase price.
This section states that the Auditor should prepare a receipt for the purchaser and send copies to the clerk of the county commission and the sheriff, who then note the sale on their records.

§11A-3-51. Deputy commissioner to report sales to Auditor; Auditor to approve sales.
The deputy commissioner must report sales to the Auditor within 14 days after the auction or sale. The Auditor then decides whether the sale is in the state's best interest and either approves or disapproves it. If disapproved, the purchase price is refunded and the land is subject to sale again. If approved, the purchaser should begin the process to obtain a deed.

§ 11A-3-52. Duties of purchaser to secure a deed.
This section outlines the steps a purchaser must take within 120 days following the approval of the sale by the Auditor to secure a deed for the real estate purchased. Failure to fulfill these requirements results in the loss of all benefits from the purchase. It also allows the purchaser to request an extension to fulfill these requirements.

§11A-3-53. Refund to purchaser of payment made at Auditor’s sale where property is nonexistent:

This states that if within 180 days after buying a property at an Auditor’s sale, the buyer finds out that the property doesn't exist, they can submit a lawyer's certificate to confirm this. The Auditor will then refund the money the buyer paid on the day of the sale. If the Auditor, sheriff, clerk of the county commission, assessor, or another related party finds out within 180 days that the tax lien on the property should be cancelled, they will do so and refund the buyer's money.

§11A-3-54. Notice to redeem:

This section is about a notice that the Auditor sends to the original owner if a property has been sold due to delinquent taxes. This notice informs them that the property was sold and gives them the total amount they need to pay to get it back (redeem it). This includes the original taxes, interest, charges due at the sale date, any taxes paid since the sale, and costs for the title examination and preparation of the notice. If the property is the person's primary residence, they can request to pay this total in up to three payments. The Auditor charges a fee for this notice.

§11A-3-55. Service of notice:

This section describes how the notice to redeem is delivered. It should be mailed and, if necessary, published at least 45 days before a deed could be issued for the property. It describes how the notice is served to people residing in the state, people not residing in the state, and those whose address is unknown. There are also additional requirements if the property was classified as Class II at the time of assessment.

§11A-3-56. Redemption from purchase; receipt; list of redemptions; lien; lien of person redeeming interest of another; record:

This section is about redeeming a property after a tax lien sale. It outlines the amounts a person has to pay to redeem a property, including taxes, interest, charges, additional costs, and the Auditor’s fee. If someone redeems a property due to financial hardship, they may be allowed to make installment payments. If someone pays to redeem a property that partially belongs to another person, they can file a claim and have a lien on that person's interest in the property.

§11A-3-57
This section is about what happens when someone pays the money to get their property back (redeem it) after it was sold because they didn't pay their taxes. The person in charge (the deputy commissioner) gives the money and the buyer's details to the sheriff. The sheriff then takes the money and keeps the part that covers the original taxes, interest, and charges that were due when the property was sold, plus a bit extra for each month since the sale.

§11A-3-58
If the original owner manages to redeem their property, the sheriff has to tell the person who bought it at the sale (the purchaser) and give them back the money they paid. This includes the amount they paid at the sale, any other taxes they paid since then, and any expenses they had for things like checking the property title or preparing a list of people who needed to be told about the redemption. But there's a limit of $500 for these expenses. The sheriff also has to give them a detailed statement of the money they're getting back and a copy of the redemption certificate.

§11A-3-59
If the property isn't redeemed within the given time, the deputy commissioner gives a quitclaim deed to the purchaser. This is a type of deed where the original owner gives up their rights to the property. The deed has to be recorded in the county office, and the purchaser pays a fee of $50 plus any recording expenses. Once they've done this, they can inspect the property and do any necessary repairs to keep it in good condition.

§11A-3-60
This section says what to do if the deputy commissioner doesn't do their job properly. If they don't prepare and serve the notice to redeem or the deed as they should, the person who's affected can go to court to get an order forcing them to do it. But they have to do this within certain time limits. If the court agrees with them, they'll order the deputy commissioner to do what they should, or they might appoint someone else (a commissioner) to do it instead.

§11A-3-61
This section is about what happens when one person buys tax liens on two or more pieces of neighboring property in the same tax district. They can choose whether they want one deed for all the properties, or separate deeds for each one. If they get one deed for all the properties, it has to describe each property separately.

§11A-3-62. Title acquired by individual purchaser.
This section talks about how an individual who purchases a property at a tax sale acquires the title. The purchaser gets all the rights, title, and interest to the property that belonged to the person who could have redeemed the property, unless that person paid their taxes or their rights are protected by certain sections of law. If the property was sold due to unpaid taxes, the title dates back to July 1 of the year the taxes were due. The purchaser can also start legal actions to make their title clear and undisputed.

§11A-3-63. Effect of irregularity on title acquired by purchaser.
This means if there were any mistakes or irregularities in the process leading up to the delivery of the tax deed to the purchaser, it won’t invalidate the title unless specific sections of law state that it's grounds for a lawsuit to cancel the sale or deed.

§11A-3-64. Sheriff to receive proceeds of deputy commissioners' sales and redemptions from the deputy commissioner; disposition.
The sheriff collects all money from tax sales and redemptions. They must turn these funds over to the deputy commissioner immediately. The money is divided in a certain order, including payments to the deputy commissioner, Auditor, general county fund, and the general school fund. If there's any leftover money from the sale, it's divided among the various taxing units based on the total amount of taxes due.

§11A-3-65. Right of former owner to surplus proceeds.
The former owner of a property sold due to delinquent taxes can claim any surplus from the sale (money left over after taxes, interest, and sale costs are paid) within two years after the sale. If they don't claim it within two years, it goes to the general school fund.

§11A-3-66. Compensation of Auditor.
The Auditor gets paid for their services. They receive a flat fee for each item they certify, and a commission on each sale or redemption, up to a maximum amount.

§11A-3-67. Liability of officer failing to perform duty; penalty.
If an officer refuses to perform their duty, they may be fined a certain amount.

§11A-3-68. Disposition of lands heretofore purchased by or forfeited to state.
This section details the procedure for lands previously bought by the state at tax sales or forfeited to the state. These lands are reentered into the tax records under the name of the person who owed taxes at the time of the state's purchase, and they're charged with all unpaid taxes and costs. These lands can then be sold under this law. If the lands were previously certified for sale by a court but haven't been sold, they're considered certified for sale under this law and can be redeemed or sold according to these rules.

§11A-3-69. Effect of repeal.

This is like saying if we delete or cancel some rules (specifically the ones listed), this won't change anything about deals that were made before January 1, 2022, regarding money owed because of unpaid taxes on properties (called tax liens).

§11A-3-70. Release of title to, and taxes on, lands on which all taxes paid for ten years.

This is saying if someone has paid all their taxes on a piece of land for 10 years straight, any claims the state had on that land because of unpaid taxes from more than 10 years ago are cancelled. This works for past and future situations. However, this doesn't affect anyone who got the land through certain transfers (as per the state's constitution) before those provisions were deleted in 1992.

§11A-3-71. Deeds of deputy commissioner conveying coal, oil, gas, timber and other natural resources.

This says that when the deputy commissioner sells things like coal, oil, gas, timber, or other natural resources for the state, they don't have to list all the specific rights and privileges that come with these resources. If they've sold these things before and didn't list those rights, those rights are still considered to have been included in the deal.

§11A-3-72. Release of taxes and interest.

Because of confusion and uncertainty in old records, any taxes, interest, and charges that might be due for any real estate from 1935 or earlier are considered fully paid. From 1936 onwards, if all taxes have been paid, the state gives up any claim it had to the land because of unpaid taxes. When figuring out how much someone needs to pay to get their land back (redemption), the Auditor will start counting from 1936, not charging anything from before that year.

§11A-3-73. Release of taxes, interest and charges on land assessed by erroneous description, etc; misdescription, etc., not to result in forfeiture or subject land to the authority and control of the Auditor.

This says if there were mistakes in how the land was described or the owner's name was stated, or the land was listed in the wrong place for tax purposes, but the owner still paid taxes on it, then any taxes that might be due because of the mistake are considered paid. If the state took over the land because of these mistakes, the state gives up its claim to the land. This rule is meant to help landowners and should be used to solve problems in a way that helps them.

§11A-3-74. Severability.

This is like saying if a teacher has a list of rules for the classroom and one rule is found to be unfair or wrong, only that rule is removed. The rest of the rules still apply. This is the same for this law - if one part is found to be wrong or unfair, only that part is removed, the rest of the law still stands.
